The future of Keycloak Operator CRs (#329)
keycloak/keycloak-web: blog/2022/operator-crs.adoc

:title: The future of Keycloak Operator CRs
:date: 2022-08-10
:publish: true
:author: Václav Muzikář

> A while back, we've https://www.keycloak.org/2021/10/keycloak-x-update.html#_operator_and_containers[announced] a new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A while back, we have https://www.keycloak.org/2021/10/keycloak-x-update.html#_operator_and_containers[announced] a new
```

Operator rewritten from scratch to provide the best experience for the Quarkus distribution. While the
https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-operator[legacy Operator] is now deprecated and
https://www.keycloak.org/2022/03/releases.html[will reach EOL with Keycloak 20], the
https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/operator[new one] is already available as
a preview, see the https://www.keycloak.org/operator/installation[installation guide].

One of the most common concerns around the new Operator is the current lack of the CRs for managing Keycloak resources,
such as Realm, Users and Clients, in a cloud-native way. One of the key aspects of the new Operator will be the reimagined
way for managing these Keycloak resources via new CRs and git-ops. This new approach will leverage
the https://www.keycloak.org/2022/07/storage-map.html[new storage architecture] and future immutability options,
making the CRs the declarative single source of truth. In comparison to the legacy Operator, this will bring high robustness,

> reliability and predictability to the whole solution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
reliability, and predictability to the whole solution.
```

Author: 👍 Thanks!

> One of the most common concerns around the new Operator is the current lack of the CRs for managing Keycloak resources,
> such as Realm, Users and Clients, in a cloud-native way. One of the key aspects of the new Operator will be the reimagined
> way for managing these Keycloak resources via new CRs and git-ops. This new approach will leverage
> the https://www.keycloak.org/2022/07/storage-map.html[new storage architecture] and future immutability options,
> making the CRs the declarative single source of truth. In comparison to the legacy Operator, this will bring high robustness,
> reliability, and predictability to the whole solution.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most common concerns around the new Operator is the current lack of the CRDs for managing Keycloak resources, such as realm, users and clients, in a cloud-native way. One of the key aspects of the new Operator will be redesign
of managing these Keycloak resources via CRs and git-ops. This new approach will leverage
the https://www.keycloak.org/2022/07/storage-map.html[new storage architecture] and future immutability options,
making the CRs the declarative single source of truth. In comparison to the legacy Operator, this will bring high robustness,
reliability, and predictability to the whole solution.
```

Immutability is far more wired-in than in the storage, see comment below.

> However, since the new storage is still WIP and currently is lacking some features like the options for immutability that

Reviewer: It is not only the new storage which lacks immutability. Non-exhaustive set of examples of inter-area dependencies follows:

- When a new realm is added (even via a CR), master realm has to be updated with new role and client
- Realm default client scopes needs to be cleaned on client scope removal
- When a role is removed, respective role mapping in groups and users is updated.
- When a client is removed (even via CR), respective client roles are removed as well.

These are not mandated by storage but by the Keycloak design.

As mentioned in a meeting earlier, immutability in the storage is one of features which can be implemented in the new storage. However, without changing the design and implementation, storage immutability cannot be enabled while keeping Keycloak operable.

Author: Thanks for the review! Good point. Rephrased that section a bit. Please let me know if it works for you.

are crucial for the new CRs, the new Operator is currently missing those CRs for managing Keycloak resources. The missing

> CRs will be added once the new store has support for it, which is currently expected in Keycloak 21 (please not this is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CRs will be added once the new store has support for it, which is currently expected in Keycloak 21 (please note this is
```

Author: Good catch, thanks!

> However, since the new storage is still WIP and currently is lacking some features like the options for immutability that
> are crucial for the new CRs, the new Operator is currently missing those CRs for managing Keycloak resources. The missing
> CRs will be added once the new store has support for it, which is currently expected in Keycloak 21 (please note this is
> a subject to change).

Reviewer: Seems some of CRs should be CRDs?

```suggestion
However, since the new storage is still work in progress and currently is lacking some features like the options for immutability that
are crucial for the new CRs, the new Operator is currently missing those CRs for managing Keycloak resources. The missing
CRDs will be added once the new store has support for it, which is currently expected in Keycloak 21 (please note this is
subject to change).
```

A while back, we have https://www.keycloak.org/2021/10/keycloak-x-update.html#_operator_and_containers[announced] a new
Operator rewritten from scratch to provide the best experience for the Quarkus distribution. While the
https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-operator[legacy Operator] is now deprecated and
https://www.keycloak.org/2022/03/releases.html[will reach EOL with Keycloak 20], the
https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/operator[new one] is already available as
a preview, see the https://www.keycloak.org/operator/installation[installation guide].

One of the most common concerns around the new Operator is the current lack of the CRDs for managing Keycloak resources,
such as realm, users and clients, in a cloud-native way. One of the key aspects of the new Operator will be redesign
of managing these Keycloak resources via CRs and git-ops. This new approach will leverage
the https://www.keycloak.org/2022/07/storage-map.html[new storage architecture] and future immutability options,
making the CRs the declarative single source of truth. In comparison to the legacy Operator, this will bring high robustness,
reliability, and predictability to the whole solution.

> The new storage is still work in progress and currently is lacking some features like the file store to persist
> data in a file instead of DB. Additionally, more features will have to be added to Keycloak, including but not limited to
> a completely new concept of immutability which will be used to ensure any data coming from the CRs (and subsequently from
> the file store) are read-only from the REST API, UI and other interfaces. All of this is critical to proper CRs implementation,
> hence the new Operator is currently missing the CRDs for managing Keycloak resources. The missing CRDs will be added once
> Keycloak has the necessary support for it, which is currently expected in Keycloak 21 (please note this is subject to
> change).

Reviewer: This is a big topic shift between paragraphs: operator -> new storage :)

```suggestion
Before we would consider operator ready for leveraging CRs, we expect completing several features:

* Read-only administration REST API
* Read-only view in the console and other interfaces
* File store (expected in Keycloak 20).

All of this is critical to proper CRs implementation,
hence the new Operator is currently missing the CRDs for managing Keycloak resources. The missing CRDs will be added once
Keycloak has the necessary support for it, which is currently expected in Keycloak 21.
```

Author: Thank you for the feedback! I too an inspiration from your suggestion and updated the PR. Please let me know if it works for you.

> In the meantime we have prepared a https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-k8s-resources/tree/operators-tandem[few workarounds]

Reviewer: Repository referred by this URL is empty (?)

Also would be good to start this paragraph with explanation of what workarounds could be expected so that the reader would know prior to following the link.

Reviewer: Then I would suggest referring directly to README file and stating it:
```suggestion
We have prepared a few options to alleviate the situation with missing CRDs
in https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-k8s-resources/tree/operators-tandem[this repository].
If you would like to try the new operator out, please see those options described in
in https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-k8s-resources/blob/operators-tandem/README.md[README] file.
```
WDYT?

Author: Thanks, your wording seems better to me. Updated the PR.

The README is in the root of the branch, so when a user clicks the link to the branch itself, it opens the readme for them too. Therefore I wouldn't put a second link just to the README there.

:title: The future of Keycloak Operator CRs
:date: 2022-09-01
:publish: true
:author: Václav Muzikář

A while back, we have https://www.keycloak.org/2021/10/keycloak-x-update.html#_operator_and_containers[announced] a new
Operator rewritten from scratch to provide the best experience for the Quarkus distribution. While the
https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-operator[legacy Operator] is now deprecated and
https://www.keycloak.org/2022/03/releases.html[will reach EOL with Keycloak 20], the
https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/operator[new one] is already available as
a preview, see the https://www.keycloak.org/operator/installation[installation guide].

One of the most common concerns around the new Operator is the current lack of the CRDs for managing Keycloak resources,

> such as realm, users and clients, in a cloud-native way. One of the key aspects of the new Operator will be redesign

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
such as realm, users and clients, in a Kube-native way. One of the key aspects of the new Operator will be redesign
```

of managing these Keycloak resources via CRs and git-ops. This new approach will leverage
the https://www.keycloak.org/2022/07/storage-map.html[new storage architecture] and future immutability options,
making the CRs the declarative single source of truth. In comparison to the legacy Operator, this will bring high robustness,
reliability, and predictability to the whole solution.

Before we would consider operator ready for leveraging CRs, we expect completing several features including but not
limited to:

* File store (expected in Keycloak 20) to persist data in a file instead of DB.

> * Read-only administration REST API, UI Console and other interfaces. This is required for the new immutability concept

Reviewer 4: Admin UI shouldn't be fully read-only. It should only be read-only for immutable resources, while there should still be possibility to manage mutable resources.

Author: @stianst Thanks for the review! I'd try to loosen the statement about read-only to not make any commitments there. Even though initially we could really have e.g. Admin Console read-only as a whole.
